[DOCS-5910] Update to Blue Ocean editor doc (#5356)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/book/blueocean/pipeline-editor.adoc

= Pipeline Editor

> The Blue Ocean Pipeline editor is an easy way for anyone to get started with creating Pipelines in Jenkins.

Reviewer: I don't know the Jenkins product abbreviations well, in case my suggestion doesn't apply, but pretty sure this is JOSS. 
```suggestion
The Blue Ocean Pipeline editor is an easy way for anyone to get started with creating Pipelines in {JOSS}.
```

Author: Hi @cari-mason no worries at all! In this case, those macros would not work correctly in the Jenkins docs, so every usage of Jenkins will be written out accordingly. I think I've run into this before, and was able to confirm that unfortunately these are custom macros for the CloudBees docsite repo specifically.

> It's also great for existing Jenkins users to start adopting Pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also great for existing {JOSS} users to start adopting Pipeline.
```

Author: same as previous suggestion on {JOSS} / Jenkins

include::doc/book/blueocean/_blue-ocean-status.adoc[]

The editor allows users to create and edit Declarative Pipelines and perform actions such as adding stages or configuring parallel tasks, depending on their needs.
When the user completes their configuration, the editor saves the Pipeline to a source code repository as a `Jenkinsfile`.
If the Pipeline requires further modification, Blue Ocean makes it easy to jump back into the visual editor to modify the Pipeline at any time.

video::FhDomw6BaHU[youtube, width=640, height=360, align="center"]

== Starting the editor

To use the editor, a user must first <<creating-pipelines, create a Pipeline in Blue Ocean>> or have at least one existing Pipeline in Jenkins.
If editing an existing Pipeline, the credentials for that Pipeline must allow pushing changes to the target repository.

The editor can be launched through the:

* *New Pipeline* option from the link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/blueocean/dashboard/[Blue Ocean dashboard].
* *Branches* tab within the link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/blueocean/activity/#branches[Activity view].

> * *Edit* (icon:pencil[]) in the Pipeline run details view.

Reviewer: Your inline icons look so nice.

Selecting an existing stage or adding a stage displays the link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/blueocean/pipeline-editor/#stage-configuration[stage configuration] pane instead.
To navigate back to the *Pipeline Settings* pane, select any empty space in the background of the editor.
Within the Pipeline Settings pane, there are two sections that are configurable.

=== Agent

The *Agent* section controls which agent the Pipeline uses.
This performs the same process as the <<../pipeline/syntax#agent, agent directive>>.
The *Image* field allows users to configure which container image runs when the Pipeline is active.

=== Environment

The *Environment* section allows users to configure environment variables for the Pipeline.
This is the same process as the <<../pipeline/syntax#environment, environment directive>>.

== Stage editor

The left pane displays the stage editor UI, which allows users to create or add stages of a Pipeline.

image:blueocean/editor/stage-editor-basic.png[Stage editor view of new pipeline., role=center]

* To add a stage to the Pipeline, select the icon:plus[] icon to the right of an existing stage.

> Selecting the icon:plus[] icon below an existing stage will add a parallel stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selecting the icon:plus[] icon below an existing stage adds a parallel stage.
```

After setting the stage name and saving, the name displays above the stage.
Stages that contain incomplete or invalid information display a icon:warning[].
Pipelines can have validation errors during editing, but saving is blocked until the errors are fixed.

image:blueocean/editor/stage-editor-error.png[Stage editor with error displayed., role=center]

== Stage configuration

Selecting a stage in the editor displays the *Stage Configuration* pane on the right side of the screen.
Here, you can modify the name of the stage, delete the stage, and add steps to a stage.

image:blueocean/editor/stage-configuration.png[Stage configuration pane, role=center]

The name of the stage can be set at the top of the stage configuration pane.
The more menu, represented by three dots to the right of the stage name, allows users to delete the currently selected stage.
Selecting *Add step* displays the list of available step types.
After selecting a step type, the page displays the step configuration pane.

image:blueocean/editor/step-list.png[Step list filtered by 'file', role=center]

== Step configuration

> This pane displays differently depending on the step type selected, and contains the fields or controls necessary for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pane display is based on the step type selected, and contains the necessary fields or controls.
```

image:blueocean/editor/step-configuration.png[Step configuration for JUnit step, role=center]

> After saving the name of the step, it will remain as originally entered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After saving the name of the step, it remains as originally configured.
```

Author: I wasn't fully happy with how I worded that sentence, so I rewrote that information to be a bit more clear. Would this work in its place, or would you have another suggestion on how to best navigate this info @cari-mason ? Thanks so much as always! 

```
Be sure to provide a strong name for the step, as the name retains its original configuration.
Deleting the step and recreating it, is the only way to provide a different name.
```

The more menu, represented by three dots to the right of the step name, allows users to delete the current step.
Fields that contain incomplete or invalid information display a icon:exclamation[].

> Pipelines can have validation errors while editing, but saving is unavailable until there are no errors.

Reviewer: I would use stronger language here, since "unavailable" is a soft way of saying something that "must" be done. 
```suggestion
Any validation errors must be addressed before it is saved.
```

image:blueocean/editor/step-error.png[Step configuration with error, role=center]

== Save Pipeline dialog

Changes to a Pipeline must be saved in source control before running.
The *Save Pipeline* dialog controls the saving of changes to source control.

image:blueocean/editor/save-pipeline.png[Save Pipeline dialog, role=center]

> There is a field to enter a description of the changes, but leaving this blank does not prevent the run.

Reviewer: I was scolded very sternly from my writing instructor years ago to never start a lead in with "there is" or "there are". She had no reference for it, she said "just don't do it". I understand that now, since there are other ways of saying that there is something on the page, but I never know how to provide feedback for this when it happens.  Sorry it is a weird rationale! 😄 
```suggestion
You can optionally enter a description of the changes before saving.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not as strict as Cari's writing instructor (lol), but agree that these words are often unnecessary (at best) and at worst they can end up as garden-path sentences. Besides those words, Cari's rewrite is strong b/c it addresses the user in 2nd person and is active voice.

Author: I love it, that makes way more sense and definitely aligns with not wanting to leave out any information or make it disconnected in any way. Thanks!!

The dialog also provides options for saving changes to the same branch or creating a new branch to save to.
Selecting *Save & run* saves any changes to the Pipeline as a new commit, starts a new Pipeline run based on those changes, and navigates to the <<activity#, Activity view>> for this pipeline.

> == Limitations

Reviewer: It is really interesting to me that Jenkins docs adds limitations to the bottom. CBFM adds limitations to the intro, and it is in the body text, not a heading like this. No feedback, just noticing it. 😜

Author: updated these to below the video that appears in the first section

= Pipeline Editor

The Blue Ocean Pipeline Editor is an easy way for anyone to get started with creating Pipelines in Jenkins.
It's also great for existing Jenkins users to start adopting Pipeline.

include::doc/book/blueocean/_blue-ocean-status.adoc[]

The editor allows users to create and edit Declarative Pipelines and perform actions such as adding stages or configuring parallel tasks, depending on their needs.
When the user completes their configuration, the editor saves the Pipeline to a source code repository as a `Jenkinsfile`.
If the Pipeline requires further modification, Blue Ocean makes it easy to jump back into the visual editor to modify the Pipeline at any time.

video::FhDomw6BaHU[youtube, width=640, height=360, align="center"]

[NOTE]
.Blue Ocean Pipeline Editor limitations
====
The Blue Ocean Pipeline Editor is a great alternative for Jenkins users, but there are some limitations to its functionality:

* The editor utilizes SCM-based Declarative Pipelines only.
* User credentials must have write permission.
* The editor does not have full parity with Declarative Pipeline.

> * The Pipeline is re-ordered and comments are removed.

Reviewer 3: I understand that "the comments are removed".  Can you provide more information about the reordering of Pipelines by the editor?  I assume it changes the order of options and environment blocks but does not reorder the stages of execution.
```suggestion
* The Pipeline is re-ordered and comments are removed.
```

====

== Starting the editor

To use the editor, a user must first <<creating-pipelines, create a Pipeline in Blue Ocean>> or have at least one existing Pipeline in Jenkins.
If editing an existing Pipeline, the credentials for that Pipeline must allow pushing changes to the target repository.

The editor can be launched through the:

> * *New Pipeline* option from the link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/blueocean/dashboard/[Blue Ocean dashboard].
> * *Branches* tab within the link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/blueocean/activity/#branches[Activity view].

Reviewer 3: It is better for those developing content for the site if the links are "site local" (without the https://www.jenkins.io prefix) so that while developing locally I am not taken back to www.jenkins.io through a clicked link
```suggestion
* *New Pipeline* option from the link:/doc/book/blueocean/dashboard/[Blue Ocean dashboard].
* *Branches* tab within the link:/doc/book/blueocean/activity/#branches[Activity view].
```

* *Edit* (icon:pencil[]) in the Pipeline run details view.

== Navigation bar

The Pipeline editor includes the <<getting-started#navigation-bar, standard navigation bar>> at the top, with a local navigation bar below it.
The local navigation bar includes:

* *Pipeline Name* - This also includes the branch name.
* *Cancel* - Discards changes made to the pipeline.
* *Save* - Opens the <<#save-pipeline-dialog, save Pipeline dialog>>.

== Pipeline Settings

By default, the pane on the right side of the editor displays the *Pipeline Settings*.

> Selecting an existing stage or adding a stage displays the link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/blueocean/pipeline-editor/#stage-configuration[stage configuration] pane instead.

Reviewer 3: Site local links preferred for easier development
```suggestion
Selecting an existing stage or adding a stage displays the link:/doc/book/blueocean/pipeline-editor/#stage-configuration[stage configuration] pane instead.
```
